Dementia Care

Aggressive Language and Behavior

Scenario
My mom becomes mean and aggressive towards caregiver. Mom yells at her to get out and may even try to slap her away. It’s a daily struggle and the caregiver’s ready to quit. 

Common response: Caregiver wakes up mom who is sleeping in her bed, tells it is time to get up and clean up, tries to help to get out of bed. Mom refuses to get out of bed and to get ready, want to stay in bed. Mom throws her pillow at caregiver, makes fists, tries to punch caregiver when caregiver attempts to try to get mom out of bed. Caregiver asked mom to calm down, explaining she is doing her job. Patient refuses help from caregiver, asked caregiver to leave.
Expert explanation: People with dementia can become aggressive for many reasons--it may be an expression of pain, fear, frustration, depression, or anger. People with dementia may not understand what you are asking them to do and become frustrated. . Use distraction, encouragement, reassurance, and try to be flexible if someone is being uncooperative and angry.
Recommended response: Mom in bed. Caregiver introduces self and plan of the day. When patient refuses to get ready for the day, caregiver offers to come back to reattempt and give choices without rush, giving ample time. When patient with dementia requests to eat in bed instead of dining table, caregiver offers alternate option of eating on the table in her bedroom, not in bed.


Agitation and Anxiety

Scenario
My mom becomes mean and aggressive towards caregiver. Mom yells at her to get out and may even try to slap her away. It’s a daily struggle and the caregiver’s ready to quit. 
  
Common response: Mother having hard time finding clothes, putting on winter clothes/inappropriate clothes. Daughter tells mom it is hot outside and wear something else, tries to rush. Mother having hard time closing button, does not know what to do with clothes. Daughter tells “what is wrong with you” and patient gets embarrassed and asks daughter to leave her alone as she can do self. Daughter insists to help and tries to grab the blouse. Mother pushes daughter away. Daughter break into tears and leave the room.

Expert explanation: Agitation and anxiety are often triggered by feeling a loss of control, misperceiving situations or actions as threats, inability to communicate clearly, and frustration with tasks or interactions with family and caregivers. How caregiver approaches and communicate a person with dementia can make a difference.
Recommended response: Daughter observes her mother who is struggling to get dressed. Daughter offers help as she sees that her mother is having hard time deciding what to wear. When mom refuses for help, daughter acknowledges mom’s feeling, tells mom that she is sorry, offers her availability in case that mom needs help, and comforts mom that she will stay and be there for mom. Daughter continues to stay with mom. Daughter helped to simplify the closet so that it is easier for mom to see inside and have fewer clothing options to choose from, clothes that are easy to put on.

Depression and Apathy
  
Scenario
Daughter explains that her mother has not been wanting to do any of the things she used to like to do. She is frustrated that her mother lays in bed all day and refuses to get up.
 
Common response: Mother is lying in bed during the day. Daughter asks her mother to get up but mother refuses. Daughter gives up and leaves the room discouraged.

Expert explanation: Depression and apathy occur in many persons with dementia. Apathy is different from depression. With apathy, a person may experience a lack of motivation, effort or energy to do everyday tasks, no longer have interest in talking with others or participating in activities, or show a lack of reaction to people or things that occur. People with depression may be sad or tearful, irritable, restless and have feelings of low self-worth. People with depression may also have sleep problems, loss of energy and appetite changes. See medical attention if the behavior is significant or if it is a sudden change from their usual self.

Recommended response: Mother is lying in bed during the day. Mother initially refuses to get up from bed. Daughter uses an incentive for mother to get out of bed by saying her friend is coming to visit. Mother is excited that she is having a visitor and gets out of bed. Mother goes to the living room and is enjoys working on a jigsaw puzzle with her friend.

Hallucinations
  
Scenario
Lauren explains her mother has been waking up in the middle of the night, hallucinating. Both Lauren and her mother are tired during the day due to lack of sleep.

Common response: Lauren's mother awakens at night and is scared by a shadow on the wall. She runs to the living room and asks Lauren for help. Frustrated, Lauren takes her mother to her room, turns on the light, shows her there's nobody there, and tells her to go back to bed.
Expert explanation: HALLUCINATIONS are a result of a problem in the part of the brain that helps interpret sights and sounds. Hallucinations involve seeing or hearing things that aren't there. They can be frightening for the person with dementia. A good approach to reduce the occurrence of HALLUCINATIONS is to remove the objects that trigger them.
Recommended response: Lauren's mother runs into the living room, scared. Lauren gets up and tells her mother she'll "take care of it." She goes into the bedroom and immediately notices the trigger, a coat rack and hat projecting a shadow on the wall. She removes the trigger from the room and reassures her. She kisses her mother goodnight.

Home Safety
 
Scenario
Son explains that his father walks around everywhere in the home and gets into everything, causing a safety issues. Son feels though he needs to watch his father constantly or else he will get into trouble.
 
Common response: Father walks into the kitchen, grabs moldy bread, knocks food over in the fridge, grabs a knife and tries to cut cheese. He then turns the stove on high and then rummages through different cabinets and pulls out a pan. Pots and pans fall out of the cabinets almost hitting him and make a loud noise. Son hears the noise and comes into the kitchen, yelling at his father for the mess he has made in the kitchen.

Expert explanation: As dementia progresses, a person’s abilities and judgment diminish, making the home a potentially dangerous place. There are various home safety modifications that can be put in place such as using child safety locks to store away medications and sharp objects, throwing away expired foods, removing or covering stove and oven knobs, and having the poison control phone number nearby in case of an emergency. It takes effort and creative problem solving, but in the end, safety modifications can keep your loved one safe at home.

Recommended response: Son implements safety measures in the kitchen by throwing away expired foods, locking knives and pots and pans in the cabinets, placing covers over the stove and oven knobs, and organizes the refrigerator so it is neat and organized. Father comes into the kitchen and tries to open the cabinets and turn on the stove but cannot. He ends up finding grapes in the refrigerator and starts to eat them.


Refusal to Bathe
 
Scenario
Lauren explains that her mother used to bathe every day. Her mother now refuses and says she's afraid of the water. Lauren wants to know what to do.
 
Common response: Lauren attempts to get her mother to shower. Her mother resists and tells Lauren to leave her alone. Lauren pleads with her mother but gets nowhere. She leaves the room, frustrated.
Expert explanation: REFUSAL TO BATHE is a common behavior in people with dementia. Bathing can become scary as dementia progresses. Since bathing is a personal activity, the recommended approach is to be sensitive, tactful and respectful of the person's dignity and sense of modesty.
Recommended response: Lauren tells her mother it is time for her spa treatment. She is able to get her mother near the bathroom and then tells her before each step what she is about to do. Lauren remains calm and kind and asks her mother to test the water temperature. She makes slow, thoughtful movements so as not to scare or startle her mother. She also asks her mother to participate, letting her do what she can to bathe herself.

Refusal to Take Medications
 
Scenario
Stacey's grandmother refuses to take her medication. She asks repeatedly why she needs to take it. Stacey seeks advice as to what to do.
 
Common response: Stacey approaches her grandmother with medication. Her grandmother challenges her with questions and Stacey responds with what the medication is for. Stacey explains the consequence of not taking the medication and becomes irritated. Stacey gives up when her grandmother again refuses.

Expert explanation: REFUSAL TO TAKE MEDICATIONS is a common manifestation of dementia. Since taking medications is often a daily occurrence, refusal can cause caregiver frustration. The recommended approach is to stay calm. In addition, trying to explain the consequences of not taking a medication may not be understood by persons with more advanced dementias.

Recommended response: Stacey approaches her grandmother in a gentle way and sits next to her on the couch. Her grandmother challenges her and she responds by reading a note from the doctor that her grandmother remembers and respects. Stacey reads it slowly and clearly so her grandmother can understand. She encourages her grandmother to take her medication for the doctor.

Repetitive Behaviors
  
Scenario
Jane explains that her father, once active, now sits for long period of time tapping hands. Jane is annoyed.
 
Common response: Jane works on her laptop while her father sits on the couch repeatedly tapping his hands. Jane raises her voice and pleads with him to stop. She gets up and goes over to the couch where he is sitting, puts her hands on his hand, and forcefully asks him to stop, exclaiming "Dad, cut it out."

Expert explanation: REPETITIVE BEHAVIORS is demonstrated by people with dementia because they may be unable to remember recent events or actions (short-term memory loss). They may also repeat words or gestures as a means to soothe themselves. The behaviors may be an attempt to communicate a need or physical discomfort. The recommended approach is to try and identify the underlying cause.
Recommended response: Jane approaches her father, notes he's been sitting on the couch all day, and gets him up to grab a snack. She pulls out some magazines for him to look at and puts some music on. Jane is effectively managing the occurrence of REPETITIVE BEHAVIORS.

Repetitive Phone Calls
  
Scenario
Jane has hired a caregiver who can stay with mom while daughter is at work, but mom has been calling her constantly and asking when she will be home.
 
Common response: Patient looks for her daughter, Jane who went to work in the morning. Caregiver is reading a magazine. Patient calls daughter asking where she is and when she is coming home, tells her she is sad because she hasn’t seen her for a while. Caregiver checks email on her phone, not paying attention to patient. Caregiver offers patient to watch TV and tells patient daughter will be home soon. Patient is pacing back and forth in the living room, calls daughter again. Daughter responds call and complains about her repetitive calls while she is at work. Patient is fidgeting with napkins and putting in her pocket. Mother becomes frustrated and confused and asks caregiver to get out from her house.

Expert explanation: People with dementia may experience separation anxiety, which is feeling insecure and anxious without someone familiar around them. Because people with dementia are forgetful, they will forget that they called before or asked the same questions even 5 minutes ago. When a loved one has separation anxiety, it will be helpful to distract them by keeping them busy. You can call your loved one to say “Hi” and check in.

Recommended response: Patient looks for her daughter, Jane who went to work in the morning. Caregiver introduce self, reorient, redirect, reassure patient, shows note from daughter for comforting. Daughter calls and check on patients, reminds mom that she will be home soon and offer fun activities to do with caregiver.

Repetitive Questions
  
Scenario
Stacey's grandmother asks the same questions over and over. Stacey answers the questions only to have them asked again a minute later. Stacey is visibly frustrated.
 
Common response: Stacey wraps a gift while her grandmother asks "What time is the party?" Stacey answers "Six o'clock." Two minutes later, Stacey's grandmother asks the same question. Stacey responds in an impatient way and appears irritated.
Expert explanation: REPETITIVE QUESTIONS are often triggered by anxiety caused by memory loss as well as boredom. As dementia progresses, people often lose the ability to remember what they have just said or done (short-term memory loss). Repetitive questions may also be a result of an inability to express a need or emotion. The recommended approach is to remove triggers and alleviate anxiety and uncertainty.
Recommended response: Stacey removes items that trigger REPETITIVE QUESTIONS. She posts the day's schedule in plain view and reviews it with her grandmother several times a day. By doing this, Stacey provides her grandmother with attention and reassurance that she needs.

Sexually Inappropriate Behaviors
  
Scenario
Mr. Brown has moderate dementia and continues to live at home. His private caregivers have been quitting due to his sexually inappropriate behaviors.
 
Common response: When Mr. Brown makes sexually inappropriate suggestions that caregiver gets frustrated and takes offense ultimately declaring that she is going to quit.

Expert explanation: It is important to remember that sexually inappropriate behavior may occur because the person with dementia is lonely or bored. These behaviors can become more prominent during personal care. Maintaining professionalism and clear boundaries can help discourage the behavior.

Recommended response: Caregivers should wear professional attire such as scrubs. Redirect the conversation or activity if possible. If the sexually inappropriate behavior continues, it is appropriate to calmly but firmly tell the person that you are feeling uncomfortable and that the behavior is an appropriate.

Sleep Disturbances
 
Scenario
My mother sleeps all day and keeps everyone awake at night. In the morning, we tell her to get up and do something, but all she wants to do is sleep. When nighttime comes, she is awake and keeps the whole house up. How are we supposed to get any rest?
 
Common response: Son enters mother’s bedroom at 2 am while she is fumbling with her clothes in her closet. A verbal disagreement ensues shortly, leaving both son and mother upset and frustrated.

Expert explanation: Sleep disturbance is a common problem in dementia. Some patients may mistake daytime for the night time, while some sleep excessively in the morning and stay awake at night. They may wake up in the middle of the night confused and disoriented. This presents safety issues such as falling, wandering and other unsupervised behaviors. For some patients, sleep disturbance is caused by or made worse by excessive napping, lack of daytime activities, and not enough exposure to sunlight. Medication effects, caffeine, alcohol and pain can disrupt sleep/wake cycles. In any event, if your loved one is awake at night, stay calm and be patient, keeping in mind that how you respond to the situation greatly affects the outcome for your loved one.
Recommended response: Son comes into the room, asks his mother if she needs help. She states she is busy getting ready for work and her son should be sleeping since he has school in the morning. Son gently notifies her it’s not time for work or school to start just yet. Son suggests a glass of warm milk. They head to the kitchen for a glass of milk and then go back to sleep.

Sundowning
 
Scenario
Lauren's father's behavior gets worse as the sun goes down. He appears restless.
Lauren wants to know what she can do to help her father get through this time of the day without getting confused or agitated.
 
Common response: Lauren works on her laptop while her father searches for his checkbook. Instead of attending to her father, she tells him to "Sit down and watch TV." He continues to search and walks into the kitchen alone. Lauren hears something break and rushes to the kitchen.
Expert explanation: SUNDOWNING, aka SUNDOWNER'S SYNDROME, is a common behavior that occurs in early evening. It is not a disease, but rather a set of symptoms characterized by confusion, anxiety, aggression, or agitation. This is caused by damage to the area of the brain that regulates a person's internal clock. The sleep-wake cycle becomes disrupted and may lead to increased napping during the day and difficulty sleeping at night. SUNDOWNING is triggered by reduced light and is exacerbated in a person with unspent energy from a boring day.

Recommended response: Lauren sees her father looking for his checkbook. She gets up and makes the room brighter by turning on the lights. She speaks to him with a pleasant tone and engages him in a new activity that they do together.

Wandering
 
Scenario
Jane's father has been living with her for two years. He often exhibits wandering behaviors such as trying to go leave the house through the front door while saying he "wants to go home."
Jane does not understand why this is happening and seeks help.
 
Common response: Jane finds her father about to exit a door of the house. Jane firmly grabs her father’s arm and pleads with him to “stop” in a distressed tone.

Expert explanation: WANDERING occurs as dementia progresses. It can be triggered by: a.) an old memory; b.) not recognizing the environment due to poor vision or confusion; or c.) feelings of distress. People with dementia often have trouble expressing where they are going and/or the reason(s) for going there. Wandering can be triggered by seeing items that one picks up before leaving the house (e.g. car keys, umbrella, coat, etc.).
Recommended response: Jane removes items that trigger WANDERING behavior. She finds her father attempting to leave, approaches him calmly and redirects him with an activity they can do together.



