You may be involved in assisting the person with
Parkinson’s with many activities of daily living and
medical tasks, as well as maintaining a household;
shopping and preparing meals; organizing records,
papers and appointments; transporting your loved one
to healthcare visits; keeping up with social and family
relationships and many other tasks. At the same time,
you may be working, raising children or grandchildren
or coping with your own health or personal issues.
Research from the National Alliance for Caregiving shows the top four
care partner concerns:
1) Keeping your loved one safe
2) Managing your own stress
3) Finding activities to do with your loved one
4) Taking time for yourself
Research also reveals that when care partners are asked what they want,
the majority respond that they want information about coping with being
a care partner. This information takes several forms, including knowledge
about the disease, comfort with the caregiving role and managing stress.
The following tips can help you cope.
» Forgive yourself for not being perfect. Caring for someone with a chronic
illness means your world has been turned upside down. Your daily routine
will definitely change, and you will probably have to compromise some
of your personal standards of housekeeping, meal preparation and other
tasks. Accept your own humanity. Give yourself a pat on the back for
doing the best you can.
Acknowledge your right to feel emotionally off-balance. Recognize the
hidden grief component of your anger, anxiety, guilt and depression.
Expect adaptation to, but not resolution of, your grief. Accept it and
seek out someone who understands it.
» Determine your limits. What is your comfort level providing care? Some
people feel uncomfortable when incontinence becomes an issue. Some
determine they can provide care at home as long as others in the family
can put up with the disruptions. Everyone has limits. What are yours?
» Make regular breaks from caregiving a priority. You cannot be a good care
partner to someone else if you do not take care of yourself. Your loved one
can survive a few hours and, periodically, a few days without you.
» Be kind to yourself. Remember you are experiencing normal reactions
to abnormal circumstances.
» Seek out joy in your relationship with the person with Parkinson’s.
Your hands-on duties, such as bathing and dressing your loved one,
might feel like work, but these tasks bring you together. Add some fun
to your hands-on care: sing songs, tell jokes, share goals and dreams.
» Develop a habit of participating in activities together outside cares.
Shared time as husband-wife, mother-daughter, siblings or other
relationship – rather than as care partner and care recipient, or even care
partners – allows you to enjoy each other and build happy memories.
» Try to forgive your loved one for past hurts. Resentment toward past
wrongs and injustices will make your present caregiving role difficult. Let go
of what was, and concentrate on making what is healthy and productive.

Like most things in life, caregiving is not an either/or
experience. Caregiving offers trials and triumphs as well
as challenges and joys. A Caring Today survey found that
a majority of care partners experience the role as “more
rewarding than expected.” This is significant information:
If the Parkinson’s community – professionals as well as
those personally affected by PD – can help people through
the hurdles, they can potentially find more positives in
the experience.
What are some care partner rewards?
Connection: Few people plan ahead for the role of care partner. At first,
you may think you are alone. You will probably figure out that there
are many others in the same situation. You make friends. You adopt
an identity as “care partner” (or care partner, or carer). You discover new
interests and endeavors.
Relationships: Accept and be thankful for the help of family and friends,
and appreciate your quality time with them. Although “sharing the care”
can sometimes lead to conflict, people who have worked through this with
some success find that it can actually bring families closer. In addition, your
caregiving role might bring a feeling of increased closeness to the person
with Parkinson’s.
Growth: Take pride in how much you have learned and in discovering
your own strengths. Through caregiving you are likely to gain new
insights about life. Find positives in every day, feel empowered and
recognize your accomplishments.

The rewards are not limited to those on the previous page.
You may also experience the following, and many others:
• Taking pleasure in giving
“I feel good that I am able to return the favor and take care of her.”
• Seeing positives
“I am grateful that I have my health.”
• Exploring new spiritual beliefs or revisiting old ones
“My beliefs and faith keep me going.”
• Feeling proud and purposeful
“I am doing what’s right and fulfilling my responsibility.”
Benefits of Support Groups
• Commonality among members
• Education, information
• Learning to adjust to diagnosis
• Practical techniques
• Feeling understood
• Reducing stigma
• Socialization and friendships

The incidence and severity of Parkinson’s symptoms vary
from day to day, even from one time of day to another.
Being organized and planning for many potential outcomes
can help you put a positive spin on what might otherwise
be a stressful situation.
Keep an organized record of your loved one’s medical and surgical history.
This will come in handy when the person with Parkinson’s needs to fill
out forms and answer questions about his or her health history. Use a
notebook or three-ringed binder to write the medical and surgical history,
so new information can easily be added. If you choose to keep records
electronically, make sure you have a way to access it when you go to
appointments, or keep a separate hard copy to bring with you.
Keep all of the following information in the notebook or binder:
• Healthcare directive: Create this document with the person with
Parkinson’s, with input from the family and the healthcare team. Give
copies to your loved one’s physicians, and keep a copy in the binder.
• Names, addresses and phone numbers of your loved one’s primary care
doctor and other medical specialists
• Up-to-date medication list: List each medication with strengths and
times. For example: carbidopa/levodopa 25/100, 1 pill four times a day –
8am, 12pm, 4pm, 8pm. The medication list can be kept on the computer
(and printed for the binder) or written down. Either way, it must be
updated after every medication change.
• Clinic visit notes
• Appointment schedules

People with Parkinson’s may have other health conditions,
too, and they all require regular medical management.
Your loved one may get a cold or the flu; develop a bladder
infection; or be diagnosed with arthritis, diabetes, a heart
or lung condition, cancer or other ailment. Be proactive in
caring for all health concerns, not just Parkinson’s.
It is important to remember that Parkinson’s symptoms tend to change
slowly over time. Sudden changes may signal a medical problem such as
an infection. Emotional stress, worry and anxiety can also worsen PD
symptoms. The neurologist may direct you to your loved one’s primary
care doctor for evaluation of a sudden change in symptoms.
Medical Information to Consider
• Parkinson’s disease medications often cause dry mouth, which can result in
dental problems. Make sure your loved one gets dental check-ups twice a year.
• Although there is no one special diet for people living with Parkinson’s, your
loved one should follow these general recommendations:
– Drink 48-64 ounces of fluid daily.
– Eat foods high in fiber. Choose fresh or frozen fruits and vegetables
as well as whole grain pasta and bread.
• Protein in foods can interfere with levodopa absorption. Talk to the
healthcare team about medication timing and meals.
• Parkinson’s can cause changes in blood pressure that result in dizziness
when you stand up. Tell the doctor if the person with Parkinson’s
experiences dizziness when standing up. The doctor should test for
a condition called orthostatic hypotension by measuring blood pressure
in both sitting and standing positions.
• The person with Parkinson’s should wear sunscreen when outside.
Point out any changes in the skin to a doctor.
• Your loved one may develop dry or flaking skin on the face. Use mild soap,
warm water and creams, which are more moisturizing than lotions on the face.
• The scalp may also become itchy and dry. Try a shampoo containing
selenium sulfide, salicylic acid, zinc or coal tar. Make sure you rinse
shampoo thoroughly from hair. Switch products periodically. See a
dermatologist if skin problems do not go away.

The Importance of Exercise and
Activity for People with Parkinson’s
People with Parkinson’s who start exercising earlier
experience a significant slower decline in quality of life than
those who start later. Regular exercise can help combat
muscle stiffness, posture changes and weakness; reduce
balance, walking and other mobility changes; and manage
constipation, which is commonly seen in people with PD.
You can encourage regular exercise and activity in the following ways:
» Help your loved one establish a regular exercise routine. Offer to join the
person with Parkinson’s for a walk, bike ride or visit to the local health club.
» Allow the person with Parkinson’s to be as independent as possible, but
help when needed. Certain tasks may now take longer to perform, and
PD symptoms can change throughout the day.
» Loss of automatic movements can make the person with Parkinson’s
less inclined to move around, so remind your loved one to change
position at least every hour during the day. People with Parkinson’s
should avoid long periods of time sitting. Suggest listening to an
audiobook while walking around or try watching TV from a treadmill.
» Encourage your loved one to pursue hobbies and activities.
Parkinson’s disease can cause apathy or loss of motivation, and
changes in motor control can make activities your loved one
enjoyed in the past more difficult, so he or she may be less likely
to participate without encouragement from others.
» Seek a referral to a physical therapist who can provide
individual evaluation, recommend an exercise program and
help with follow-through.
Parkinson’s disease impacts the ability to
perform movements that are usually done
without conscious thought.
As the disease progresses, your loved one’s movements will become smaller
and less automatic. Parkinson’s can also result in inaccurate perception of
movement size and quality, so your loved one may not fully recognize these
changes. You can use cues to help your loved one move more easily. Simple
cues can make the brain less dependent on its automatic systems and
“reroute” messages so movement improves.
• Keep it short. Long explanations or instructions are often harder to
follow for someone with Parkinson’s disease. Use these simple phrases
to cue movement:
– “Stand tall” if posture becomes too flexed
– “Big steps” to decrease shuffling when walking
– “March” when turning to keep knees high
• Since Parkinson’s impacts automatic movements, standing tall and
taking big steps, for example, may not happen automatically. You will
likely need to repeat cues on a regular basis.

Most people with Parkinson’s experience a soft voice volume and may be
difficult to hear. Loss of automatic facial expression can be misinterpreted
as boredom, anger or sadness. Mood changes in Parkinson’s such as
apathy, depression or anxiety can also affect communication. The following
tips can make communication easier.
» Try to have conversations one-on-one or in small groups.
Smaller groups will be more willing to pause the conversation
and wait for a comment than a large group.
» Reduce or remove distractions like TV, radio or music when speaking
to the person with Parkinson’s.
» Be close to each other when you talk so it is easier to hear.
Avoid yelling from another room in the house!
» Encourage the person with Parkinson’s to take a deep breath
before beginning to speak to enhance his or her vocal loudness.
» Give the person with Parkinson’s time to respond or participate in
conversation. Just like slowness in movement, thought processes
can be slowed by Parkinson’s disease.
» Do not make assumptions about how your loved one is feeling based
on facial expression. Remember, you can’t judge a book by its cover!
» Recognize that mood changes such as depression, anxiety and apathy
can be symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. If you notice these symptoms
in your loved one, speak to his or her physician.
» Seek a referral to a speech pathologist who is certified in the Lee
Silverman Voice Treatment therapy (visit www.lsvtglobal.com) or
who has attended a Parkinson’s Foundation Allied Team Training
for Parkinson’s program.
Coping with Fatigue
Many people with Parkinson’s experience excessive
daytime sleepiness. They report a loss of energy and
chronic fatigue, which may be disruptive to planned
activities and schedules.
Consider the following:
» People with excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) feel fatigue during the
day and then have poor quality sleep at night. Activities that make you
tired may be bad for the morning, but excellent at night. Adding exercise
to the routine may improve nighttime sleep quality.
» Think about scheduling fewer activities each day. The person with
Parkinson’s may have low energy and therefore may not be able to
do as much as he or she used to do.
» Consider breaking up tasks, errands or other activities into shorter time
periods, allowing for rest breaks as needed.
» Schedule brief rest periods or naps to restore your loved one’s energy
during the day. Be mindful that excessive daytime sleep may prevent
someone from resting well at night.
» Recognize that your schedule may need to be flexible and responsive to
how the person with Parkinson’s is feeling. You may need to postpone or
cancel activities based on these variations.
» Have a back-up plan in case the scheduled activity falls through.
» Make sure travel schedules include enough time to accommodate
rest periods.
» Be aware that the person with Parkinson’s may request more
assistance when feeling fatigued. Offer help as needed.
» Encourage your loved one to avoid tasks that require significant
coordination or attention when fatigued to avoid accidents or falls.
Making Daily Life Easier
Even simple, routine tasks can become more
challenging as Parkinson’s disease progresses.
The following changes can make home tasks easier to perform:
» Relocate frequently used items in the kitchen, bedroom and bathroom
to a place where they can be readily accessed by your loved one.
» Label drawers and cabinets to easily identify contents.
» Get electric toothbrushes and shavers to make hygiene tasks easier
for your loved one to perform.
» Substitute Velcro closures for buttons on shirt cuffs, waistbands and
other clothing that is hard to fasten. Some shoes also use Velcro!
» Buy adaptive equipment like covered cups, rocker knives, large-handled
utensils and plate guards to make mealtime easier for your loved one.
» Seek a referral to an occupational therapist for individualized evaluation
and recommendations tailored to your loved one’s needs and concerns.
